HARRIS RTX 2000



2. What was the elementary base of a computer/processor (relays,
vacuum tubes (aka thermoionic valves), transistors, magnetic cores,
integrated circuits (ICs) – were they hybrid, low scale integration,
Large Scale Integration (LSI), Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI),
modern microprocessors)? What where the physical characteristics of
the equipment (weight, size, power consumption)?

3. What type of architecture did both computers have? Were they
accumulator based, register based, stack based, memory-to-memory or
some other architectures?

4. Were they zero-address, one-address, two-address, three-address or
four address machines?

5. What were the registers in both architectures? Did they have
registers at all? Were they general purpose registers or specialised
ones? How many registers did each architecture have? What were the
widths of these registers?

6. Were the flags used in the architectures? What flags were there?

7. What was the data width (machine word) of each architecture?

8. What was the memory layout of each system? Was address space
continuous, or was it segmented, paged, subdivided into banks? What was
the (effective) width of the address? What was the maximum possible
amount of memory in each system? What was the typical amount of memory
with which the system was used?

9. Was virtual memory supported, and how? Was it paged or segmented?

10. What was the ISA of each architecture? How many instructions did
each architecture have? What were the classes of the instructions?
What instructions formats did each architecture support? Provide
examples of some 8-16 instructions. What instructions were similar in
both architectures? Which instructions were different?

11. What were the addressing modes supported by each architecture?
Which modes were similar, and which were different?

12. What were the I/O capabilities of each architecture?

13. Were interrupts supported for each architecture? How was the
interrupt support similar, and how was it different in both
architectures?

14. What data types did each architecture support on instruction
level? Was fixed point or floating point supported by hardware and
how? Where integers sign-magnitude, one's complement, two's
complement? What other "exotic" data types did architecture support
(decimal numbers, complex numbers, etc.)?

15. What was the speed of each system? How did clock frequencies, clock
cycles per instruction, instruction rates compare? Which system was
faster?

16. Did the architectures use cache memory? If yes, how much?

17. What were the typical application areas of each architecture? How
were they used? Describe briefly (on paragraph) one particular
installation of each architecture.

18. How much software was written for each discussed architecture, is
it (still) available, what application domains did it target? What
compilers and programming tools (debuggers, profilers, assemblers) did
architectures have? What software libraries were available?
